From the Psychological Inslitute at the Technical University of Braunschweig


Occupational Psychological Investigation of the Activity of Recording Morse Signals

At the same time a new training method for radio operators

From the Technical University Carolo-Wilhelmina at Braunschweig

for the attainment of the dignity of a doctor engineer

approved

Dissertation

presented by

Dipl.-Ing. Ludwig Koch

from Kassel

1936
Johann Ambrosius Barth / Leipzig

Reporter: Prof. Dr. phil, Bernhard Herwig
Co-reporter: Prof. Dr.-Ing. Leo Pungs

Submitted on April 25, 1935

This paper appears simultaneously in the

"Journal of Applied Psychology and Character Studies"

Volume 50, Issue 1 and 2 (1936)

Table of Contents

A. Introduction p. 1,
B. General considerations on the study of radio activity p.2.
    I. Field of application of radio communication.
    II. the morse code.
    III The problem of wholeness and shape in Morse code.
C. The study of psychological phenomena during Morse code recording p.7.
    I. The experimental arrangement.
    II. evaluation of the results of the experiment
    III. interpretation of the results.
        a) General principles of the relationship between the Morse code and the tempo of the call.
        b) Individual design of individual Morse code signals.
    IV. Summary of the results and conclusion.
D. The psychological training procedure p.27.
    I. Investigation and criticism of the previous training procedures.
    II. development of a new training method.
        a) Theoretical foundation.
        b) Practical design of the procedure.
            1. general structure.
                α) Sound pattern and rhythm.
                β) Amplification of the gestalt effect of Morse code. Two-tone procedure.
                γ) Prayer tempo in the learning procedure.
            2. special issues.
                α) Various difficulties in learning single letters.
                β) Differentiation of similar letters.
                γ) Practicing groups of letters.
                δ) Distribution of practice.
                ε) Practical results of learning.
E. Question of aptitude p. 59.
F. Technique of implementation p. 66.
G. Summary of the main results p. 67.

A. Introduction

The aim of all work-psychological investigations must be to
to create optimal impact opportunities for human work.
This goal is achieved through the mutual adjustment between the
psychological structure of the human being and the design of all working conditions,
under which the respective work to be investigated takes place. The adaptation
between man and work can be achieved in two different ways with fundamentally
different starting points, either the human being or the work,
but with the same goal.

If one starts from the human being, then the task of work psychology will consist of
the individual human being in his psychological structure by means of a thorough
psychological examination (aptitude test), in order to find a job for him that corresponds to his
find a job for him which corresponds to his aptitudes and for which he is suitable
the actual meaning of the term occupation, is really "called".

The professional activity, however, is not only conditioned by aptitudes, but it is to a large extent
is largely made up of certain practicable skills for which the original aptitudes are only
for which the original aptitudes are only prerequisites. In correct pursuit
of this way of adapting man to his work, a further task of industrial psychology is to develop
task of industrial psychology will be the development of psychologically correct
which will develop the actual occupational skills out of the basic aptitudes determined in the
the basic aptitudes determined in the aptitude test.

However, this adaptation of man to his work will not yet be able to lead to full
success for the work, because even the best suited and semi-skilled professional representative
and semi-skilled professional representative cannot have a full 1 effect on his work, if
the working conditions themselves are not now in their turn also adapted to the human being in his
are not adapted to the human being in its entire psychological and physical structure. This leads to the
second way of work psychology, which has to start from the examination of all working conditions.
working conditions. This investigation will have to be directed
not only to the design of the special conditions of the work to be
conditions of the work to be performed, such as the design of the workplace, the tools, the machine, accident prevention measures
the machine, accident-preventing measures, working posture, etc., but also on the general
general working conditions, such as the design of the workspace, working hours, etc.
working space, working hours, break regulations, etc.

While the aptitude tests are adjusted to the psychological attitude of the individual
of the individual person in his or her individual character, the investigations of the
of the working conditions must be based on the normal mental and physical
of the normal mental and physical constitution of the working man and to create
conditions in such a way that they are adapted as far as possible to this normal capacity.
as far as possible.

Only when both paths are followed and complement each other, will there be
the greatest possible adaptation between man and work is achieved and
the prerequisite is created for the most favorable possibility for the
of the working person. Fundamental in both cases will be a thorough
psychologically directed examination of the working conditions, since also
aptitude testing and training are also based on this knowledge of the psychological
psychological processes in the respective occupation.

For this reason, the present work on the activity of the radio operator is also based on a psychological analysis of the work process.
psychological analysis of the work process and its conditions.
conditions. Since the essential part of the radio operator's work is the recording of the
Morse code, this process must first be subjected to an in-depth psychological
psychological examination. From this, as will be shown in the
the present work, the essential basic factors which influence the work of the
which influence the work of the radio operator, from which then the development of a new
of a new training procedure that corresponds to all psychological conditions
and certain aspects for the question of aptitude tests for radio operators.
follow.

B. General considerations on the study of radio activity

I. Field of application of the radio activity

The work of the radio operator consists in its essential content in the recording and
Morse code; in addition, there must be a certain amount of technical
operating knowledge must be present. The requirements in related to the tempo,
i.e. on the quantity of characters per mint when recording and transmitting, are more or less
the different operating conditions of the radio traffic more or less
less high according to the different operating conditions of the radio traffic. For example, due to the extraordinary importance of radio for the
the extraordinary importance of radio for the operation of airplanes, the demands on the radio operator must be
radio operators must be increased accordingly. For admission to the flag radio operator service
the conditions of the first-class radio operator's diploma must therefore be fulfilled.

Radio communication in the ship service is subject to the same conditions, i.e. 2,
perfect mastery of the speed 100 Z/min. Code text. The
Examination requirements of the shipboard radio operator course are, for example:

    "Keying a telegram of 100 words of 5 letters each in 5 minutes on the
    Morse code in perfect writing. Recording of a code telegram of
    100 words and an open text of 125 words of 5 letters each in
    6 minutes; transcribing the latter on a typewriter¹."

In the case of other applications, it can be generally stated that
the normal operating speed of the average radio operator is within the limits of 60-90
Z/min. Within this speed range works e.g. also
the radio operator with the message troop in the army service. If also with the sea for
tactical reasons (eavesdropping and eavesdropping activities), the wireless electrical
transmission is more displaced by the wire-connected telephone,
the radio will remain important as a means of immediate readiness.
will remain important.

In the economic and traffic life the wireless hearing reception is no longer
more efficient devices have replaced the human sensory tools.
have replaced the human senses. For example, in the postal service, wireless telegraphs are in use,
which perform up to about 400 Z/min. There is a certain limit to auditory
by human performance. The international
agreement, according to which a telegrapher must record 125 letters per min,
has come about without prior testing of the ability to reach such a high speed (cf.
(cf. Biegel²).

Although the activity of man as a punker has been pushed back by technical equipment
the activity of the human being as a punker, the hearing reception will always remain indispensable where
where, due to special conditions, the human being cannot be replaced.

¹ Plan and examination regulations for the radio operator course I. Class with
Special regulations for the training of the debeg and transradio service. Berlin
1925.

² Biegel, An aptitude test for radio telegraphists. PsychotZ, 6th Jg., H.
2, 1931.

II. The Morse code

According to international agreement, exact proportionality conditions are defined for the
Morse code, precise proportionality conditions are specified. The characters
are composed of short and longer tones, the pitch of which may vary according to the type of
of the transmitter. At different speeds, the ratio of short and
the ratio of short and long tones and their spacing should always remain the same.
remain the same. The unit of measure for this proportionality is the short element. In the
the elements of Morse code shall be designated as dots and dashes, according to the
according to the common usage among radio operators, which is derived from the optical
optical symbols for Morse code (-, -~--).

The international agreements on the proportions of the drawing specify
the following:

    Unit of measurement is the dot length.
    The stroke has triple dot length.
    Within the Morse code character, the pause between the individual elements of the character
    of the character has the duration of one dot length.
    After each Morse code character, the pause had the duration of one stroke.

These internationally defined proportions of the Morse code character are - as will be shown
as present investigations will show - only for the auditory recording with
speeds above about 50 Z/min, however, a speed which is always
speed which will always be reached in practical radio communication.

The reason for this lies in the fact that the acoustic recording of Morse code
just like the perceptual contents in other sensory areas, is bound to the general
the general psychic phenomenon of wholeness and gestalt perception.

III The problem of wholeness and gestalt in Morse code

The results of gestalt-psychological research lead to the fundamental
statement that the impressions of our sensory world are of a holistic nature.
Felix Krueger states in his treatise "on psychic wholeness": "In the case of
mental conditions of any kind, qualitatively and functionally the mental whole
functionally the psychic whole¹." O. Buss explains the concept of wholeness as
as follows: "We speak of wholeness when a whole formed by

¹ F., Krueger, on psychic wholeness. NeupsySt 1. 1926.

Life bound primary necessity of unity is present.
The whole has a primacy of essence before its parts; it is impossible,
to let the whole constitute itself out of a lawful order of parts.
20 from a lawful order of parts 3.4

We cannot logically define the concept of wholeness or wholeness, but only wholeness.
define, but only wholeness can be represented,

A quadrilateral drawn on a sheet of paper, for example, is not to be understood simply as a relationship or sum.
as a relation or sum of four lines meeting each other,
rather this quadrangle is perceived as a wholeness, an optical shape which immediately
which immediately and directly stands out from its surroundings.

The same appearance of gestalt formation occurs in reading. The
does not read individual letters, but perceives the word as a whole as a shape.
shape. The practical application of this insight leads to the development
the well-known whole reading method for learning to read,

The military bugle signal can be seen as an example for the conception of gestalt also in the acoustic field.
military bugle signal. The meaning of such a signal
is not understood by grasping individual isolated tones, but rather by the
the sound complex in its entirety, i.e. as an acoustic shape in its typical
in its typical overall structure for this signal. Likewise
every melody is not composed of single tones, but of tone complexes,
partial shapes.

This lively wholeness of things is not limited to the only momentary
instantaneous grasp of perceptual contents, but also the retention and reproduction of any
and reproducing of any impressions of mental events and experiences in the memory
memory takes place in such forms.

Thus, for example, it is much more difficult to sing individual tone sequences of a melody from memory than to sing the same tone sequences.
than to repeat the same sequence of notes if it is contained in a melody.
melody.

Accordingly, gestalts have a higher reproduction ability than ungestalt
complexes.

¹ O. Buss, Muttersprachliche Gestalten bewerlet unter dem Gesichtspunkt der
wholeness. ZAngPs 46. 1934.

So, if any content is to be memorized and retained, so that reproducing is
reproduction is possible quickly and safely,
thus, the learning methods have to start from such holistically grasped, designed
contents. Decroly's whole-semetbode, already mentioned, is based on these conditions in the
is based on these preconditions, because not single letters but whole word pictures are
individual letters, but rather entire word pictures are imprinted from the beginning.
just as later the reading process of the literate is based on the shape of the whole word.
of the whole word². The successes of the whole word semetbode speak for the
correctness of this method.

Just as rightly and successfully, the application of these considerations in the optical field
for reading, the same conclusions are drawn for acoustical perception.
acoustical perception the same conclusions will be drawn for a procedure for learning the
Morse code.

If also variously - by far not everywhere - approaches in this
in this direction with the previous and now still usual procedures for learning the
and giving of Morse signals are present, then it is to be stated nevertheless
that no procedure covers all points of view, which can be derived from the
the examination of the Gestalt experience when listening to Morse code.
for the learning of Morse code.

In order to make this application of gestalt-psychological knowledge possible for a learning procedure
a detailed psychological investigation of the phenomena during the recording of the
phenomena during the reception of Morse code, which will be carried out in the following
will be made in the following.

C. The study of the psychic phenomena during the recording of the Morse signal

It is obvious, that the psychic phenomena during the recording of the Morse code
Morse code is influenced by the speed with which the signs follow each other.
follow each other. With increasing tempo not only the difficulty of recording is
not only the difficulty of the reception because of the increased demand on the
ability, but also changes in the overall acoustic 0 impression will occur.
overall acoustic impression will occur, which are closely connected with the factors that form
factors.

¹ Hamaide, The Decroly Method. Weimar, Böhlaus Nachf. 1928.
² Kern, Is our reading method correct? Freiburg (Breisgau). 1931.

The most important task will have to be to investigate this dependence on tempo
in detail, whereby it will also turn out that this is the source of almost all
almost all anftanching questions are to be clarified.

In this investigation, the first obvious way has not been taken, which is to
the psychic phenomena during hearing, i.e. during the reception of the signs.
the signs, has not been taken. An exact experimental
experimental proof by investigating the processes during hearing, many difficulties would
difficulties, as will be shown later (p. 19) in the experiments of this kind used for comparison.
will be shown later (p. 19) in the experiments of this kind used for comparison.

Rather, the investigation was carried out in such a way that practicing at different tempo
at different tempos in order to determine in which rhythm the individual elements of each
elements of each Morse code were given at the various speeds by trained radio operators.
were given by practiced radio operators. This method provides an opportunity to determine the
obtained for the elements and their intervals within the character and from character to character.
and from character to character can be examined in detail,

The justification to infer from the way of giving also the way of recording is that the
lies in the fact that the subject, who hears the sign given by him in the headphones at the same time
the sign given by her, generally gives the rhythm within the sign.
rhythm within the sign, which is not only motorically but also acoustically
not only motorically, but also acoustically most adapted. The
confirmation of this theoretical assumption will be given later, when the results of the
later on, when the results of the experiments will be compared with the direct examination of the
of the processes during the recording of the signs at different speeds.
and a good agreement will be shown.

For the giving tests only those subjects can be chosen who are
show good performance in giving due to long practice,
because only with them the natural adjustment to the acoustic rhythm takes place
rhythm without being influenced by other disturbing moments.
Several subjects must be used for these tests.
several test persons, since, as is well known, each radio operator has his own
has his own evidence. But if indeed certain general
connections between the design of the Morse code and the tempo
and the tempo, then these relations will have to be
in spite of small individual differences.

I. The experimental arrangement

According to the intention of the experiment, the temporal relations of the
the timing of Morse code transmission at different speeds.
the following experimental set-up was used for the temporal
registration.

An endless paper tape, the surface of which is sooted, is passed over two drums (Hering's loop).
(Hering's loop). The drive drum can be driven by a motor at any
motor at any desired, but in each case constant, speed.
speed. An electromagnetic writing lever and a tuning fork with 100 oscillations write on the paper
and a tuning fork with 100 oscillations/sec. to mark the passage of time.

The morse key is connected in series with the writing lever.
At the same time, the radio operator listens in through headphones, so that he can hear the
acoustic impression of the signal given by him.

The Morse key is located spatially separated from the recording device,
in order to let the subjects give their signals completely unbiased.

All subjects gave the same sequence of signs at all tested speeds.
of signs, for which the following grating was selected:

b c v q f l h y z x

II. Evaluation of the test results

The sequence of Morse code signals recorded in this way yields, by measuring the
the time proportions within the different characters and their distances.
different characters and their distances.

The relation between the recorded lingen and the corresponding times
is calculated for each of the tests performed from the following
experimental data, from which a numerical example shall be singled out.

The length of the whole paper tape was 208 cm, the time for one revolution 35
seconds.

One centimeter of travel on the paper tape thus corresponds to 0.168
seconds.

The dimensions for the points, stitches and spaces are denoted by a, b, c, d
as shown in the following sketch:

  ___ _____ _____ ___
→|a →|← c →|← b →|← d →|← a →|← c →|


Calculation of the giving velocity

The giving speed is intrinsically prescribed to the Vp. in each trial.
However, the radio operator can only keep a certain prescribed giving speed in a more or
less approximation, especially when he has to give a low tempo.
is to be given. For the evaluation of our investigations, therefore, the actual
speed from the recorded samples must be calculated in the following way
in the following way:

The total length for the 10 assumed characters = l (cm).
Time factor:                              1 cm = t (sec.)
Therefore, time for 10 characters              = l . t
----------------------------------------------------------
Speed :                                        = (10⋅60) / (l⋅t) Z/min.


It is also to be noted that the magnitude of the giving speed depends on
which Morse code is used to compose a sequence, since there are longer and shorter Morse codes.
there are longer and shorter Morse codes.

If one uses as unit of measurement for the character duration of a Morse character
(i.e., for the time during which the character is sounded) the
time duration of a "dot length", so behaves for example as an
extreme case in Morse code according to the international agreement (p.
5) the character duration of the letter e (-) to ch (----) is 1:15:

  e                        ch
  _     _____       _____       _____       _____
→|1|   |← 3 →|← 1 →|← 3 →|← 1 →|← 3 →|← 1 →|← 3 →|
       |←----------------- 15 ------------------→|

Due to the differences in the character duration of the individual Morse code
of a sequence of signals is strongly influenced. Therefore, in practice, the speed of the call can only be
can therefore only be given approximately in practice, because an average character duration, which could
which could be used as a unit of measurement or relationship for each sequence of signals, is
is not determined.

In the case of a sequence of commands in plain text, for example, the average character duration was determined by the
frequency of the letters of this sequence. In the code text the
average character duration depends on the composition of the encoding. The
entire alphabet of the letters A-Z has a mean character duration which is a
time of 8.4 point lengths.

In the present case of our recorded samples, which are composed of
relatively long Morse code characters, the average character length of the
character duration of the 10 selected characters is 10.2 dot lengths. In relation to the
the average character length of the alphabet from A-Z, the tempo of our sequence would be
of our gege sequence, if calculated to have 25 Z/min. in absolute terms, would be relatively

25 ⋅ 10.2 / 8.4 = 30 Z / min.; instead of 82 2/min. calculated in absolute terms, the tempo

the tempo would grow relatively to 85 ⋅ 10.2 / 8.4 = 100 Z/min,.

After clarification of these relationships, which must always be observed, the
evaluation of the test results can now take place.

With the recording equipment described, the 10 Morse code signals transmitted by
4 experienced radio operators with different high speed, were recorded.
had been recorded. From these 10 Morse signals, for each Vp. for the elements a, b, c,
d the arithmetic mean values were determined

\left( AM = \frac {\sum_{i=1}^n} n; w_i = measure values of the individual elements \right)

and compiled in each case with the corresponding calculated velocities in the curves
of Figs. 1 to 4.

Furthermore, the mean variation MV

\left( mean variation: MV = \frac {\sum_{i=1}^n \[AM - W_i\]} n \right)

of the individual values is determined. It is shown that the values for a, b, c, d
were kept with sufficient constancy by the radio operators. Larger
uncertainty is partly found for the AM value of d at low speed.
can be observed. Because of the too long intermediate pans it is very difficult to
difficult at low speed to keep the distances between two Morse code signals
to be approximately of the same size. With increasing speed therefore also
the value for d becomes more constant.

For a better overview of the given values, they are shown in Figs. 1 to 4 in 4
curves for one Vp. each. The curves show the dependence of the
temporal relations of the Morse signal to the transmission speed.

The dimensions for a,b, c, d are on the ordinate in mm, the tempo is on the
abscissa (1 Z/min = 2 mm). These curves therefore illustrate the
relationships between the lengths of the elements of the subjectively given
Morse code and the tempo and show already at superficial observation in their basically = usual course, in particular
their basically = usual course, especially the curves I to III - at
Vp. IV there are special relations to be clarified later -, that a certain
law for the dependence between the given tempo and the time ratio of the
time relation of the individual elements of the Morse code.

Fig. 1. vp. I. The temporal proportions of the subjectively given
Morse code dependent on the
Tempo, M.1 Z/min = 2 mm (reduced to ½ size).

Fig. 2. vp. II

Fig. 3. vp. III

In order to penetrate deeper into these relations, it is first of all of importance,
these temporal dimensions of the subjectively given and heard sign with the
mathematical dimensions of the Morse code, which is composed according to the proportions of the
international agreement, at the same high speed.
compare. This comparison is shown in the graphical representation (Figs. 5
to 8). At the same high tempo, each time the subjectively given
and the corresponding Morse code with the internationally fixed proportions.
proportions.

The elements a, b, c, d of the subjectively given character are so
in such a way (in mm) that they correspond exactly to the time sequence of this Morse code
Morse code at the respective tempo.

Fig. 4. VP IV.

In the same duration of this subjectively given character (s), the
Morse code with the proportions of the international agreement (o) would assume the
design as it can be seen from the graphical representation.

III Interpretation of the results.

a) General regularities about the relations between the design of the Morse code and the tempo of the call.

The discussion of the curves will provide information about the timing and the
of the Morse code, at the same time the question of the usefulness
of the proportions according to the international agreement.

If the designations we have chosen for the elements of Morse code a, b,
c, d, the proportions of the Morse code character according to the international agreement
the international agreement:

Unit of measurement for the dot length is a.

b = 3 a, c = a, d = 3 a.

Of the curves Figs. 1 to 4, only the first three of Vpn. I, II,
III, starting with the lowest speed, approx.
25 Z/min. It can be seen that the dimensions for a and c do not differ greatly from each other.
differ from each other.

The stroke length b is 3 to 4 times, in Vp. III even 8 times the
length of a, while the international agreement prescribes b = 3a.

About the dimensions a, b, c, which due to individual difference of the donor
more or less closely with the dimensions of the international agreement.
will be discussed later.

More important for our investigation is first a consideration of the distance d
between two characters. The international agreement sets this distance d =
b = 3 a, whereas in our recorded values, the distance d
is 3 to 4.6 times b.

Therefore, the radio operator does not transmit the character in the prescribed proportions at a slow
the prescribed proportions, but rather pulls it together more, even if not to the most
not to the most favorable form (b = 3.5 to 8a instead of 3a). He makes
the distance d between the individual characters considerably longer.

The subjectively given character is therefore also at low speeds
to the acoustic unit of a shape by the practiced radio operator.

This crowding together of the individual elements of the Morse code to one
is very clearly visible when comparing the subjectively given character with the
character with the dimensions of the character according to the international agreement
at the same speed (graphical representation Figs. 5 to 8).

The comparison shows how, at the observed speed of 25 Z)min.
stroke length b of the international dimension is elongated. Particularly
the length of the line will have a particularly strong effect on the human
acoustical impression, which such a Morse code with the international
international dimensions when heard. If one would hear at slow
proportions at slow speed, the result would be an agonized, pained
would result in a tortured, long stretching out of the single character, the acoustic
The acoustic shape of the character would fall apart completely. In the
example of the subjectively given sign confirms the fact, known from other psychological
from other psychological investigations, that shapes urge towards
for unification and completion.

The graphical representation in Figs. 5 to 7 shows that with increasing speeds the
velocities the conditions become more favorable for the emergence of acoustic
wholes, shapes, become more favorable. At the same time the proportions of the
the proportions of the international agreement approach the psychically most favorable
conditions.

Fig. 5. vp. I. Comparison of the subjectively given Morse code with the
Morse code according to the international. Proportions of different tempo.
s = subjective character, o == character according to the international agreement.

Fig 6. vp. II

Fig 7. vp. III

Fig 8. vp. IV

We recognize this fact from the graphical representation Figs. 5 to 7
in that as the tempo progresses up to the highest human hearing and
speed an ever greater correspondence between the mathematical proportions and the
mathematical proportions and the design of the subjectively given sign.
can be observed. On the curves Fig. 1, 2 and 3 this correspondence is shown by the fact that the b- and
and 3, this correspondence is shown by the fact that the b- and d-lines, with increasing tempo
more and more, and finally almost merge into each other. The curves
prove in general that Morse code must always take on a shape independent of the tempo, because it is
shape independent of the tempo, because it is impossible to "constitute the whole from a lawful order of parts".
order of parts" ¹. The curves prove in general that Morse must always take on a shape independent of the tempo. ¹.

In our case, this is the case when the parts can no longer merge into a single unit due to the wide
The parts can no longer merge to form a single unit as a result of the wide separation.

It can therefore be concluded from the illustrations in Figs. 5 to 7 that
the proportions of the international agreement at low speed do not correspond to the
the psychic disposition of the human being, but only from a speed of about
tempo of about 50 Z/min. from this disposition.

We have drawn this conclusion first of all on the basis of the investigations which
of giving, whereby we presuppose (cf. 5. 8) that the kind of giving is
of giving will generally adapt itself to the psychic conditions of hearing.
will adapt. In order to prove this premise, experiments were also
were carried out to clarify the conditions during hearing.

For these experimental purposes a number of arbitrarily arranged
Morse code (30 characters) were combined to form a dictation and given and recorded at various
and recorded at different speeds.

The Morse code was composed according to the proportions of the international agreement.
agreement and their temporal relations could be changed at any speed by an automatic
time ratios could be precisely maintained at each speed by means of an automatic
by means of an automatic transmitter (see p. 66).

Since the international proportions were thus automatically maintained for each tempo
were thus created, which in their temporal proportions were as
as the characters o

¹ O. Buss, Muttersprachliches Gestalten bewertet unter dem Gesichtspunkt der Ganzheit. ZAngPs 46. 1934.

Journal of Applied Psychology and Character Studies 50

in figs. 5 to 8. For the experiments, a number of radio operators were available
available who could professionally record and give speed 100 Z/min. To these
were given the signs at the various speeds, starting from approx. 25
Z/min, starting from about 25 Z/min.

The control of the usability of the signs for the recording was done by
counting the incorrect and omitted signs in the recorded dictation.

At low speed, it turned out that our subjects had very little confidence in recording the
was very low in our subjects. At a speed of 25 Z/min. only 5 to 8 characters out of
only 5 to 8 characters out of 30 given Morse code signals were correctly
were correctly picked up. With increasing speed, the audio pickup was
to finally achieve sufficient reliability in the speed range 40 to 50 Z/min.
to attain sufficient certainty. The results of the listening tests are shown in the curves Fig. 9.
Each curve represents the certainty of auditory perception of a single Vp. On
the ordinate is plotted the recording reliability S in percent. The 30
characters of the dictation have been recorded by the radio operator with zero errors.
with zero errors. The measurement "one hundred percent S" corresponds to the 30 error-free
recorded Morse code.

Fig. 9: Reliability of Morse code recording according to the international agreement depending on the speed.
of tempo. 1 Z/min = 1.5 mm, 1 % = 1 mm (reduced to ½ size).

From the findings of these listening tests, the agreement with the
obtained results of the listening tests Figs. 5 to 7.

Here too, in agreement with the earlier experiments, the fact emerges,
that the international proportions only begin to adapt from the speed range of about 50
%/min., the international proportions begin to adapt to the psychic disposition of the human being. At
at a lower speed, when the mathematical dimensions of the international
international agreement, the shape of the character begins to decay, which causes the low
low reliability of reception.

Therefore, if the Morse code is to correspond to the psychic disposition, it must always be
must always have a gestalt character, regardless of the speed.

That this conclusion is correct, is proven by another experiment, which we conducted
with the same subjects who were available to us for the preceding listening tests.
the same subjects who were available to us for the preceding auditory tests, in order to
to verify.

At the same low speed at which we had previously maintained the mathematical
dimensions automatically, we now emitted characters whose
distance d was increased (twofold). Since now also at low speed
the acoustic shape of the sign was already clearly visible, this recording did not make any
our subjects no difficulty at all, whereas the safety of the previous experiment with the
the previous experiment with the mathematical dimensions was so low.

The acoustic impression of these "designed" signs corresponds to the design,
as it occurs with the subjectively given character of our Gebe samples (fig. 5 to 7
character s) at low speed.

In both cases, the distance d is noticeably larger than the mathematical
dimension at the same tempo and the character itself is more compressed.
crowded together.

This correspondence of the subjectively given sign of the giving samples (Figs. 1
to 3, Vp. I, II, III) with the "designed" acoustic impression of the sign
of our auditory experiment provides further evidence that the way to conduct the
the investigations about the way of giving, can also give information about the
psychic processes in hearing and was therefore justified.

The necessity for this procedure arose from the fact that the
the only way to measure the number of errors (safety of recording).
(certainty of recording). However, this measure is rather coarse and does
into the subtleties of the individual relations as the exact recording of the
even if it is sufficient for this purpose to prove the correctness of our method and the
of our methodical pretence and the drawn conclusions.

On the other hand, however, the investigation of listening still offers eternal
possibilities to draw further conclusions from the interpretation of self-observations and observations by
conclusions, which at the same time can be secured by the exact derivations during the
Gbeversuchen can be secured.

These interpretations will give the opportunity to go even further into the psychic
psychic processes during the recording of the Morse code.

First of all the reasons must be explained in this way still more near, which to
the extraordinarily strong failure of the practiced radio operators, if the Morse signals are
Morse code at a low speed according to the proportions of the international
international agreement.

With the appropriate will setting each radio operator will finally
will be able to translate the thus acoustically decomposed Morse code. The pause
d between two characters is sufficiently long that it is possible to reassemble the
to reassemble the character, which has been separated, by thinking about it.
is to be reassembled. The test persons, who were used for these investigations, are, as already mentioned
already mentioned, professional radio operators, who have become accustomed to the rhythm of the
the rhythm of the 100 Z/min. tempo and the sound pattern of the sign. The patients.
could not easily adapt to the tortured disassembly of the signal and the reassembly
and the necessary reassembly. If the analytical
acoustic presentation of the sign, as shown, is generally contrary to the psycho-physical predisposition.
psycho-physical disposition, then the thereby occurring decay of the form will prove to be particularly
will prove to be particularly disturbing, if, as is the case with our
If, as is the case with our patients, a firmly accustomed rhythmic setting is present.
This probably explains the great uncertainty of our subjects during the examinations of hearing with low speeds.
the investigations of hearing at low speeds.

translated until “den Untersuchungen des Hörens mit geringen Geschwindigkeiten.”
